# Difference between Baseline Profiles and Startup Profiles  |  App quality  |  Android Developers

**Source:** [https://developer.android.com/topic/performance/baselineprofiles/difference-baseline-startup](https://developer.android.com/topic/performance/baselineprofiles/difference-baseline-startup)

---

  * [ Android Developers ](https://developer.android.com/)
  * [ Design & Plan ](https://developer.android.com/design)
  * [ App quality ](https://developer.android.com/quality)
  * [ Technical quality ](https://developer.android.com/quality/technical)



#  Difference between Baseline Profiles and Startup Profiles Stay organized with collections  Save and categorize content based on your preferences. 

This document explains the difference between Baseline Profiles and Startup Profiles.

You can use the Baseline Profile Gradle Plugin to automatically capture the human-readable baseline profile files generated by [`BaselineProfileRule`](/reference/kotlin/androidx/benchmark/macro/junit4/BaselineProfileRule) tests. When building the app, Android Gradle Plugin (AGP) compiles these human-readable profile rules into a binary format, packaged as `baseline.prof` within the Android Package Kit (APK) or Android App Bundle (AAB), that Android Runtime (ART) can use effectively for on-device compilation, provided the binary profile is smaller than 1.5 MB.

The profile files produced are typically named `startup-prof.txt` and `baseline-prof.txt`.

## Baseline Profile

The Baseline Profile file contains a comprehensive set of rules that ART uses to pre-compile frequently used code paths, which optimizes app startup, reduces interaction jank, and improves the overall runtime performance.

The Baseline Profile file is generally a superset of the rules found in your Startup Profile. This file includes all rules required for app startup optimization (generated through the `baselineProfile` Gradle task), along with additional profiles for other critical user journeys. For example, scrolling, and navigating different screens.

These non-startup rules are generated regardless of the value of the [`includeInStartupProfile`](/topic/performance/baselineprofiles/create-baselineprofile#define-generator) configuration field. For more information, see [Overview of Baseline Profiles](/topic/performance/baselineprofiles/overview).

## Startup Profile

The Startup Profile file contains rules specifically optimized for your app's startup path. During compilation, D8 and R8 consume Java bytecode to produce [Dalvik executable (DEX)](https://source.android.com/docs/core/runtime/dex-format) files. Both D8 and R8 use Startup Profiles to optimize DEX layout by placing critical startup code in the primary `.dex` file for faster class loading. To achieve the most significant performance gains, the startup code must be contained within this primary `.dex` file. If the cumulative size of the startup code is too large, it overflows into subsequent DEX files, which are often populated with non-essential classes and methods and slows down startup.

While a Startup Profile provides the metadata necessary for DEX layout optimization, R8 code optimization can be highly effective in assisting this process. By removing unused code and minifying bytecode, R8 reduces the total footprint of the startup logic. This reduction increases the likelihood that the critical code remains within the primary `.dex` file, preventing overflow and ensuring more efficient execution across a broader range of Android versions. You should generally set [`includeInStartupProfile`](/topic/performance/baselineprofiles/create-baselineprofile#define-generator) to `true` only for test scenarios essential to the app's initial display.

For more information, see [Overview of Startup Profiles](/topic/performance/startupprofiles/overview).

Content and code samples on this page are subject to the licenses described in the [Content License](/license). Java and OpenJDK are trademarks or registered trademarks of Oracle and/or its affiliates.

Last updated 2026-05-19 UTC.

[[["Easy to understand","easyToUnderstand","thumb-up"],["Solved my problem","solvedMyProblem","thumb-up"],["Other","otherUp","thumb-up"]],[["Missing the information I need","missingTheInformationINeed","thumb-down"],["Too complicated / too many steps","tooComplicatedTooManySteps","thumb-down"],["Out of date","outOfDate","thumb-down"],["Samples / code issue","samplesCodeIssue","thumb-down"],["Other","otherDown","thumb-down"]],["Last updated 2026-05-19 UTC."],[],[]] 
